---
title: "Database"
date: 2020-12-05 19:44:28 -0400
categories: database
tags:
  - database
---

Basically among the data by TB unit saved data centers that is not much ratio saved to DB, but the ratio of core data is high.

## Database model
- Relational(관계형) : People normally think relational db management system(RDBMS) about DB its consists of some tables, scheme(table layout), record(row), properties(value). ex) Oracle, MySql, PostgreSQL.
- Key-value: NoSQL(Not only SQL) DBMS. ex) Redis, DynamoDB
- Time series(시계열) : NoSQL db is designed to process time data. Timestamp exists.
ex) Popular Prometheus DB is the example of time series that Kubernetes uses much.
- Document: NoSQL DBMS without schema is created for document storage. It saves various kinds of data. Json is much used to save documents in this kind of db. ex) MongoDB  is most used.
- Wide Column: NoSQL DBMS without schema. Columns and keys can be defined in the global db. ex) Cassandra

## Database Terms
- Data file: Where DB stores data. Raw device[원시 디바이스] (ex) In case of Linux /ev/hdal), or It may be "cooked(쿠킹된)" file ( for example /sap/datafiles/bbsovdbf for C:/mysql/datafile.dbf). Currently, Most DBs  use cooked files or general files as data files, generally more than 2ea exist each db.
- Sharding(샤딩): Sharding is that taking partition division step further, and it's important in large scale horizontal expansion db. Sharding can also place several shard of table to each different node.
- Transaction: Transaction is an activity in the db and changes one or more attributes in one or more tables.
